VGATV Version 2001.0604
By Paulo S‚rgio Coelho, 1997-2001
TSR code by Santiago Mantinan, 1999
Other credits on the source code, where appropriate.

Last updated: June 4th, 2001

Contact information at the end of this document.

--- Impatient ? -----------------

  Ok, just enter this: VGATV /? for a short help on which parameters suit you
best.  Entering VGATV, loads the driver with PAL timings, and will try to
determine which VGA chipset is present, otherwise will just support plain VGA.
Supports VESA at all times, though might work better if the chipset is
recognized earlier. If your chipset is misidentified, you can (and should)
force VGATV to use one of the supported by issuing the correct switch below.
Note that PCI/AGP cards do not have this problem.

  Parameters can be entered in any order, and are case insensitive.

  /? - Prints a short help text, so you can get a general idea on how to use
       the program.

  /IBM - makes the program ignore any chipset on the system, which might be
         useful if the program improperly detects your VGA card.
  /OAK - to support the Oak series VGA boards. Note that the Oak 037 chipset
         doesn't have interlace support. Also, the Oak 077-087 chipsets don't
         allow full-screen low-resolution modes (320x200 at 4 or 16 colors) so
         the normal, standard setting, must be used. Other Oaks do, however.
  /S3  - supports the S3 range of chipsets.
  /CIRRUS - For the GD54xx range of chipsets. Also Acumos AVGA1 or 2.
  /TRIDENT - Trident VGA cards, from 8900 to 9440 so far.
  /REALTEK - Realtek range of cards. You must use this if you have a RTG3103,
             because VGATV can't recognize this chipset.
  /UMC - selects UMC 85c4x8 chipsets.
  /WD  - Western Digital Paradise chipsets.
  /TSENG - Tseng Labs cards.

  /NTSC - chooses NTSC timings, instead of PAL timings.
  /PAL  - Just does the opposite. This is the default setting.

  /ISP - Invert Synchronization Polarity, for some hardware that inverts the
         sync polarity. Shouldn't normally be needed.

  /OE - Odd/Even mode. Some RGB converters seem to need that the screen has an
        even number of vertical retrace lines, otherwise you'll get a nice
        black and white screen. No colors. This little parameter is used to
        fine tune your badly-behaved board so that it outputs the proper number
        of lines. Yeah, because this shouldn't be needed!

  /X:<n>
  /Y:<n> - Used to center the video output on the TV. Instead of constantly
           using the cursor keys, this way you can predefine the startup
           values.

  /NOINTR - If you find interlace produces too much flickering, and can get
            away with half the vertical resolution, use this to disable it.

  /S:<n> - With the new PCI/AGP VGA card detection it becomes possible to
           exist 2 or more video cards on the same system. While VGATV will
           only use the card defined as primary card on BIOS, VGATV might not
           detect that video card because it scans the PCI/AGP bus first and
           will detect the first card that it supports, which might not be the
           primary one. This switch will make VGATV ignore (skip) <n> video
           cards before using the next detected one. This only works for PCI/
           AGP cards, on which bus can reside more than one VGA card.

  /M - Starts in VGA monitor mode, instead of TV mode. Switch with Ctrl+Alt+S.

  /U - Unloads the program from memory. Won't do it when some other TSR was
       loaded after ours.

--- The program -----------------

  This program allows you to use your TV as a monitor, given that you use the
proper hardware to connect your VGA to the output equipment.

  The driver is a TSR (Terminate and Stay Resident) which will try to make
sure your VGA card is, at all times, properly programmed for TV timings, which
are quite different from VGA standards:

  - Standard VGA timings are normally 31.469KHz horizontal frequency, and
    70.08Hz vertical frequency. Non-interlaced.

  - PAL and NTSC are interlaced. PAL (Phase Alternating Line) has a horizontal
    frequency of 15.625Khz and 50Hz vertical frequency. NTSC (National
    Television Standards Committee) has 15.750Khz and 60Hz respectively.

  There will be programs which won't work well, others won't work at all,
because they either use an unsupported video mode, or program the video card
directly, after they've set the mode. Plus, some chipests aren't fully or at
all supported.

  Supported resolutions so far: due to the way the program works, resolutions
"per si" are not supported, but rather widths, heights and combinations among
them. This makes the driver more flexible among different SVGA chipsets.
  Because of the number of values supported, I won't discriminate them here.
You can find however, a compatibility table on the web site. This table is by
no means complete. More than likely the video cards featured could support
more video modes under VGATV, not to mention other chipsets (albeit with no
interlace support).

  Note that since NTSC has less vertical resolution than PAL, modes above 480
lines appear more overscanned than PAL.

  There is no limit on the number of colours. However, due to the way some of
the higher colour mode modes are programmed, some of them may not be usable
under certain cards. For example, while I don't support 640x480x16.7M colors
in the Oak chipset, that mode is supported on the Cirrus Logic chipset, among
others.

--- The keys --------------------

  Ctrl+Alt+R resets the current video mode, so that if some crappy program
messed your screen, you can restore it back to normal. Also works when in VGA
mode. Note that this might not do any good under certain circumstances.

  Ctrl+Alt+S swaps between VGA and TV modes. Not working perfectly and can
hang your machine...

  Ctrl+Alt+arrows shift and pan the screen around your telly. I've gone to
great lenghts to make sure you could shift the screen quite heavily. It won't
work fine at the extremes on all boards, but should work ok if you don't abuse
it, and use it just for what it's for: making the screen appear centered on
the TV or monitor.
  On the other hand, I haven't taken much time to put the vertical control
working fine. It works for small adjustments only.

--- The requirements ------------

  For this to work, you need the following:

  a) a IBM PC or compatible computer system (clone for short :-). And yes,
     your 4.77Mhz IBM PC will do. The PCI/AGP card detection uses 32-bit code
     which won't run on 286 or less CPUs. Behaviour is undefined if for some
     reason VGATV thinks you have a PCI bus on your system;

  b) a VGA card. 3D cards only (like the first 3DFx's Voodoos) aren't
     supported;

  c) some memory to load this driver; if you can run DOS, you can run this.
     To save memory, you can try loading it high. Like :

     LH VGATV, in AUTOEXEC.BAT

  d) an output device like a TV or 15Khz monitor.

  Optionally, you can also have this:

  e) some hardware for the video connection, for which you can find many
     details and options on the web site.

  f) a VCR for saving those presentations;

  g) a sound board connected to your Hi-Fi system, with volume turned fully
     clockwise, or at the point where neighbours *just* start complaining :-)

  h) some application software (a game *IS* an application!).

--- The limitations -------------

  Humm, right. As stated above, besides the ocasional badly-behaved program,
this driver comes with guaranteed limitations:

  With PAL timings, only resolutions up to 800x600 can be fully viewed. With
NTSC this figure goes down to 640x480, thanks to the lower resolution of this
TV standard (525 horizontal lines, as opposed to PAL's 625). 800x600 appears
as an overscanned mode, both in PAL and NTSC. PAL sees much less screen crop
than NTSC, though. This is the preferred video mode for video recording.

  Since there are obvious limitations on the number of lines, modes that have
more than 525/625 lines, use the trick described below, in which the resolution
is actually halved, though for most purposes, it doesn't show much. Only if
you're trying to display text, you might run into trouble if the pitch is too
small. However, for photographs or most drawings, there isn't a noticeable
decrease in resolution.

  Maximum resolution is 1600x1200. Nothing above is supported.
  Minimum is 320x200. Actually, 320x175, if you can produce such a beast...
  Resolution is halved in modes above 800x600, in both PAL and NTSC, but NTSC
has much more overscan than PAL. Resolution is also halved in unsupported
chipsets at 640x480 and above resolutions, if they aren't interlaced
originally. This will find a limit very fast on chipsets featuring few bits of
a register that goes by the name of Offset, on the CRTC.

  Because standard VGA has no support for interlaced screen modes, a trick has
to be employed to get the visible area of a video mode in the screen at all
times, including modes with more than 480/600 lines.
  It works by skiping every other line, namely even numbered lines (2,4,6,...).

  This, however, has some disadvantages:
  - normal text in those modes (which by themselves are high, like 1024x768) is
    very hard to read, if not impossible;
  - 256 color modes are affected. The result is a kind of solarizing effect on
    the palette, making some images look a bit 16 colourish... Note that this
    depends on the picture being displayed. Some programs or pictures don't
    seem to be affected.

  Fortunately, your VGA card's chipset may be supported by the program, thus
allowing you to have an interlaced screen, no missing lines, and a perfect
colour display (up to 480/600 lines per image, remember). Yeah, pigs can fly,
too! :-)

  The program is clever enough to, under certain conditions, support
non-standard VGA modes while not supporting any specific chipset. This depends
on the fact that some modes on some boards, specifically turn on interlacing
so that the driver doesn't have to do it, and you can see a 1280x1024 mode
even if the driver doesn't actually support your board!
  If the mode has more than 600 lines, and doesn't turn on interlacing, only
part of the screen will be shown, full-screen, but stretched downwards. I've
added code to end this problem, but it might occur sometimes still.
  Also, depending on how the program sets the dot-clock, some modes might not
sync, while others, even higher resolution ones, might do. 800x600 is a
general culprit...

  Note that screen modes which have less than 300 lines, don't need
interlacing, thus are fully viewable, with no lines missing. This includes all
low resolution modes, such as mode 13h (320x200 with 256 colours).

  Text modes are limited to 32 lines, but there is no limitation on width.
Currently, modes 40x25, 80x25 and 132x25 are supported since I know of none
other. If they appear, there might be a chance that the program does recognize
them. Modes with more than 25 (or 30, if your card has 30-line modes) won't
show more than 32 lines at one time. The remaining lines aren't shown.

  200-line modes are not interlaced. I tried to, but it seemed impossible, at
least on the Oak 087 chipset. Anyway, as it is, the screen is much stabler,
since there is no interlacing.

--- The contacts ----------------

  If you want to share some comments on this, suggestions, criticism, chipset
  programming details on unsupported cards, post-cards, money, etc, just write
  to:

  e-mail : psergio@radiolink.net

  or,

  snail-mail : Paulo S‚rgio Coelho
               Praceta do Miradouro, 9, R/C Frente-Esq.
               2720-375 Alfragide
               Portugal

  Please note that mail-bombs will be returned to sender. No kidding.

  You can also access my web page at:

  http://www.radiolink.net/psergio, or

  http://www.geocities.com/SiliconValley/Horizon/7694

  for the latest version, news, developer information and other projects of
  mine.

  There is also a mailing list setup on E-Groups (former OneList), for which
you can register directly from the web page or go to www.egroups.com and
search for the vgatv mailing list.

  The first address is a redirector and should always be used, unless you run
into problems and might try the second one. If the web page site changes from
GeoCities, the first address should take you to the right place then.

--- The legal juice -------------

  Ok, so you find this little piece of software useful.

  Very well, you can use it, at your OWN risk, meaning if you blow up the TV,
the VCR or your room, I really don't give a damn, it was YOUR fault, NOT mine.
Same thing for the hardware circuits. Warranty is void before you thought of
downloading this file. So there.

  Also, this software may be copied, used and abused, but nowhere modified so
that my work and others that went into it, are not credited in any way or are
even deliberately hidden from others.
  You can find all sources available to download and you can contribute to the
project in any way you see fit, or just use the code for your own projects.
But remember to give credited where due.

  Additionally, you can consider this work, one of the following:

  - freeware, meaning you can use it 'till it wears off;
  - shareware, meaning if you send me money, I'll appreciate it, and you'll
    win a line in this DOC; or,
  - cardware, in which you send me one (or more!) of those fancy postcards
    showing off the views on your local town. I really prefer this one better.

  Ok, I think this one's done. Next!

--- The contributions -----------

  This section grew quite a bit, so please consult the web site for more
information on who contributed what.

--- The history log -------------

  This section is highly obsolete. For the latest driver developments, please
go to the Download section on the web site. What follows has only historic
meaning.

  Version 1.0  - Well, for a 2 day job, it wasn't that bad. Supported all
  Jan 17, 1997   standard VGA modes and fixed some problems occuring in a
                 previously used driver. However, it had some problem with
                 another driver, which I didn't bother to identify, and also
                 had a color problem in a Trident card, in mode 13h (320x200,
                 256 colors).

  Version 2àx - Good alpha versions. 2à3 was the last in the line.
  Jan-Mar, 1997

  Versions 98.xxx - and above. See the web page for details.

  Version 98.288 - /OE switch added.
  Oct 15, 1998     Documentation updated and revised after a long time.

  Version 98.298 - /OE switch wasn't being detected if it was the only one
  Oct 25, 1998     being specified. Yeah, a bug.

  Version 99.047 - /U switch added. The program has been converted to ASM,
  Feb 16, 1999     which means less RAM used when loaded. Also the uninstall
                   process is different. Minor bugs corrected.

  Version 99.055 - Mode swapping between VGA and TV works now. Text still not
  Feb 24, 1999     recovering well. Less memory used when resident.
